README.md, before:

# Haskell Stream Processor

Haskell Stream Processor is a command line utility to process streams
using [Haskell](http://www.haskell.org) code.

There are many reasons why Haskell is suitable for stream processing from the
command line.  Code written in Haskell is concise thanks to a clean syntax and
the type inference which allows code without type decoration. Also it is very
easy to define one-line transformations by combining functions.

For example:

```sh
hsp "L.map (L.head . words) . lines"
```

prints the first word of each line of the input stream.

## Installation

From the project directory

```sh
cabal install
```

This will compile and install the executable `hsp` and the library
`HSProcess.Representable`.

##  Usage

`hsp` supports different modes:

### Evaluate an expression

It is possible to use `hsp` to evaluate a user expression without
input using the option `-e`:

```sh
hsp -e "1"
```

### Work on the stream

The standard mode of `hsp` process the whole stream. It accepts a
string representing a transformation from the stream, that has type
`Data.ByteString.Lazy.ByteString`, to some value with type that is an
instance of `Rows`:

```haskell
ByteString -> Rows a
```

`Rows` is a special case of `Show` for representing data on the
command line . For example, to print on stdout what it gets from stdin:

```sh
hsp "id"
```

### Split stream in chunks and process them

Many times, stream processing is about splitting the stream on some delimiter,
like `'\n'`, and process each chunk of data. With the standard mode of
`hsp` this can be achieved using the `split` function of `ByteString`:

```sh
hsp "L.filter (not . null) . split '\n'"
```

This happens so often that `hsp` has a mode to split automatically the
stream on a delimiter using `-d [<delimiter>]`.  If
`<delimiter>` is omitted, then it is set to `\n`. With `-d`, the
function provided must have type:

```haskell
[ByteString] -> Rows a
```
The command before can be rewritten as:

```sh
hsp -d "L.filter (not . null)"
```

### Map a function on each chunk of data

A specific case of `hsp -d <delimiter>` is `hsp -d <delimiter> -m` that
is equivalent of mapping the supplied function to the input list. In this case
the function must have type:

```haskell
ByteString -> Row a
```

For example, to take the first word of each line:

```sh
hsp -m "L.head . words"
```

When `-m` is specified, `-d` can be omitted and the delimiter is
automatically set to `\n`.

## Configuration

Haskell Stream Processor is a command line utility and for this reason it needs
informations, like which modules should be loaded, that cannot be easily passed
as arguments. There are two configuration files located under
`$HOME/.hsp`,  one to import modules and one to import user defined
functions.

### Modules

Haskell Stream Processor reads a list of modules to load from the file
`$HOME/.hsp/modules`. Each line of this file is composed by the name of a
module eventually followed by a space and it's qualified name. An example could
be:

```sh
Control.Monad
Data.List L
```

which means that all the functions from `Control.Monad` and `Data.List`
will be available to the user, but for `Data.List` functions you must
qualify them with `L.`.

There are some modules that are loaded automatically without qualification. In particular,
the module `Data.ByteString.Lazy.Char8` is automatically loaded
because `hsp` works on lazy bytestrings. This means functions like that
in `Prelude` work on list, like `map`, in `hsp` work on
`ByteStrings`. Same for function that work on `String`.

Note that `Prelude` is loaded with the qualified name `P`, so its
functions are not directly visible.

### User defined functions

It is possible to define new function to be used in Haskell Stream Processor
inside the file `$HOME/.hsp/toolkit.hs`.

## Differences with the Glasgow Haskell Compiler

It is already possible to evaluate an function using the
[Glasgow Haskell Compiler](http://www.haskell.org/ghc/) using the option
`-e` and by passing the custom function to `interact`:

```sh
ghc -e "interact id"
```

The main differences are that Haskell Stream Processor works on (lazy)
`ByteString` instead of the slower `String`, it can load modules
automatically from the `module` file and can load user defined functions
from the `toolkit.hs` file. Also, Haskell Stream Processor supports
different modes from working on the entire stream, like working on each line.

## Examples

In all the examples, `Data.ByteString` is loaded without qualification
whereas `Data.List` is qualified as `L`. The function `match` is an
alias for `Text.Regex.Posix.=~`.

Evaluate `2^100`:

```sh
hsp -e "2^100"
```

Print numbers from 1 to 100:

```sh
hsp -e "[1 .. 100]"
```

Take the first line of a stream:

```sh
... | hsp -d "L.take 1"
```

Take the last two lines of a stream:

```sh
... | hsp -d "L.reverse . L.take 2 . L.reverse"
```

Print the 10th element of each line:

```sh
... | hsp -m "(L.!! 10) . words"
```

Print the elements from the 2nd to the 20th of each line:

```sh
... | hsp -m "L.take 20 . L.drop 1 . words"
```

Get the number of words:

```sh
... | hsp -d "L.length . L.concatMap words"
```

Get the number of lines:

```sh
... | hsp -d "L.length"
```

Sort integers and remove duplicates:

```sh
... | hsp -d "L.nub . L.sort . L.map asInt"
```

Sum the 2nd elements of every line:

```sh
... | hsp -d "P.sum . L.map (asFloat . (L.!! 1) . words)"
```

Split each line on a delimiter ':' and print the second element:

```sh
... | hsp -m "(L.!! 1) . split ':'"
```

Remove empty lines:

```sh
... | hsp -d "L.filter (not . null)"
```

Filter lines that match a pattern:

```sh
... | hsp -d "L.filter (`match` "t\\w\\wt")"
```

Commit message:

add links to example in README.md

README.md, after:

# Haskell Stream Processor

Haskell Stream Processor is a command line utility to process streams
using [Haskell](http://www.haskell.org) code.

There are many reasons why Haskell is suitable for stream processing from the
command line.  Code written in Haskell is concise thanks to a clean syntax and
the type inference which allows code without type decoration. Also it is very
easy to define one-line transformations by combining functions.

For example:

```sh
hsp "L.map (L.head . words) . lines"
```

prints the first word of each line of the input stream.

## Installation

From the project directory

```sh
cabal install
```

This will compile and install the executable `hsp` and the library
`HSProcess.Representable`.

##  Usage

`hsp` supports different modes:

### Evaluate an expression

It is possible to use `hsp` to evaluate a user expression without
input using the option `-e`:

```sh
hsp -e "1"
```

### Work on the stream

The standard mode of `hsp` process the whole stream. It accepts a
string representing a transformation from the stream, that has type
`Data.ByteString.Lazy.ByteString`, to some value with type that is an
instance of `Rows`:

```haskell
ByteString -> Rows a
```

`Rows` is a special case of `Show` for representing data on the
command line . For example, to print on stdout what it gets from stdin:

```sh
hsp "id"
```

### Split stream in chunks and process them

Many times, stream processing is about splitting the stream on some delimiter,
like `'\n'`, and process each chunk of data. With the standard mode of
`hsp` this can be achieved using the `split` function of `ByteString`:

```sh
hsp "L.filter (not . null) . split '\n'"
```

This happens so often that `hsp` has a mode to split automatically the
stream on a delimiter using `-d [<delimiter>]`.  If
`<delimiter>` is omitted, then it is set to `\n`. With `-d`, the
function provided must have type:

```haskell
[ByteString] -> Rows a
```
The command before can be rewritten as:

```sh
hsp -d "L.filter (not . null)"
```

### Map a function on each chunk of data

A specific case of `hsp -d <delimiter>` is `hsp -d <delimiter> -m` that
is equivalent of mapping the supplied function to the input list. In this case
the function must have type:

```haskell
ByteString -> Row a
```

For example, to take the first word of each line:

```sh
hsp -m "L.head . words"
```

When `-m` is specified, `-d` can be omitted and the delimiter is
automatically set to `\n`.

## Configuration

Haskell Stream Processor is a command line utility and for this reason it needs
informations, like which modules should be loaded, that cannot be easily passed
as arguments. There are two configuration files located under
`$HOME/.hsp`,  one to import modules and one to import user defined
functions.

### Modules

Haskell Stream Processor reads a list of modules to load from the file
`$HOME/.hsp/modules`. Each line of this file is composed by the name of a
module eventually followed by a space and it's qualified name. An example could
be:

```sh
Control.Monad
Data.List L
```

which means that all the functions from `Control.Monad` and `Data.List`
will be available to the user, but for `Data.List` functions you must
qualify them with `L.`.

There are some modules that are loaded automatically without qualification. In particular,
the module `Data.ByteString.Lazy.Char8` is automatically loaded
because `hsp` works on lazy bytestrings. This means functions like that
in `Prelude` work on list, like `map`, in `hsp` work on
`ByteStrings`. Same for function that work on `String`.

Note that `Prelude` is loaded with the qualified name `P`, so its
functions are not directly visible.

An example of module file can be found [in the example directory](https://github.com/melrief/HSProcess/blob/master/examples/modules/modules).

### User defined functions

It is possible to define new function to be used in Haskell Stream Processor
inside the file `$HOME/.hsp/toolkit.hs`.

An example of toolkit can be found [in the example directory](https://github.com/melrief/HSProcess/blob/master/examples/toolkit/toolkit.hs)

## Differences with the Glasgow Haskell Compiler

It is already possible to evaluate an function using the
[Glasgow Haskell Compiler](http://www.haskell.org/ghc/) using the option
`-e` and by passing the custom function to `interact`:

```sh
ghc -e "interact id"
```

The main differences are that Haskell Stream Processor works on (lazy)
`ByteString` instead of the slower `String`, it can load modules
automatically from the `module` file and can load user defined functions
from the `toolkit.hs` file. Also, Haskell Stream Processor supports
different modes from working on the entire stream, like working on each line.

## Examples

In all the examples, `Data.ByteString` is loaded without qualification
whereas `Data.List` is qualified as `L`. The function `match` is an
alias for `Text.Regex.Posix.=~`.

Evaluate `2^100`:

```sh
hsp -e "2^100"
```

Print numbers from 1 to 100:

```sh
hsp -e "[1 .. 100]"
```

Take the first line of a stream:

```sh
... | hsp -d "L.take 1"
```

Take the last two lines of a stream:

```sh
... | hsp -d "L.reverse . L.take 2 . L.reverse"
```

Print the 10th element of each line:

```sh
... | hsp -m "(L.!! 10) . words"
```

Print the elements from the 2nd to the 20th of each line:

```sh
... | hsp -m "L.take 20 . L.drop 1 . words"
```

Get the number of words:

```sh
... | hsp -d "L.length . L.concatMap words"
```

Get the number of lines:

```sh
... | hsp -d "L.length"
```

Sort integers and remove duplicates:

```sh
... | hsp -d "L.nub . L.sort . L.map asInt"
```

Sum the 2nd elements of every line:

```sh
... | hsp -d "P.sum . L.map (asFloat . (L.!! 1) . words)"
```

Split each line on a delimiter ':' and print the second element:

```sh
... | hsp -m "(L.!! 1) . split ':'"
```

Remove empty lines:

```sh
... | hsp -d "L.filter (not . null)"
```

Filter lines that match a pattern:

```sh
... | hsp -d "L.filter (`match` "t\\w\\wt")"
```
