doc/README.md, before:

# Hawk Documentation

```bash
> seq 3 | hawk -a 'L.reverse'
3
2
1
```

Hawk is a command-line tool for manipulating text. Like [awk](http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/cs/awkbook/index.html), it supports an unbounded number of text transformations, implemented by the user via an expression language. In the case of Hawk, the expression language is [Haskell](http://www.haskell.org/), whose basics are assumed to be familar to the reader.


## Overview: one-liners and beyond

Command-line tools such as awk are best for one-liners, while compiled languages such as Haskell are intended for larger projects, spanning several modules and thousands of lines of code. Hawk fills the gap between those two extremes.

```bash
> seq 10 | hawk -ad 'L.takeWhile (/="7") . L.dropWhile (/="3")'
3
4
5
6
```

Hawk lets you write Haskell one-liners on the command-line. When your one-liner grows too large to fit on a single line, move some of it to `~/.hawk/prelude.hs`, a Haskell module which hosts your custom helper functions.

```bash
> echo 'between x y = L.takeWhile (/=y) . L.dropWhile (/=x)' >> ~/.hawk/prelude.hs
> seq 10 | hawk -ad 'between "3" "7"'
3
4
5
6
```

The above example illustrates how to create a new helper function `between`, and how to use it from Hawk. Whenever we use such helper functions, we will link to an example prelude containing the required definitions, like this:

([prelude.hs](between/prelude.hs))

If your prelude becomes too crowded, it might be a sign that your task is too big for Hawk. Simply move your prelude file to the folder of your choice, as the first module of a new Haskell project.


## When should I use Hawk?

At the moment, Hawk is best at filtering and reorganizing collections of strings organized in a table or as a sequence of lines. Many standard command-line tools can be easily approximated using [very short Haskell expressions](http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/Simple_Unix_tools); for example, here is a simplified version of [`head`](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Head_%28Unix%29).

```bash
> seq 10 | hawk -a 'L.take 3'
1
2
3
```

The original `head`, of course, is shorter and has more options. Hawk is useful when there isn't already a standard unix tool for what you need. For example, there is a standard tool for flipping tables vertically, but there is no tool for flipping them horizontally:

```bash
> printf "1 2 3\n4 5 6\n7 8 9\n" | tac
7 8 9
4 5 6
1 2 3
> printf "1 2 3\n4 5 6\n7 8 9\n" | hawk -m 'L.reverse'
3 2 1
6 5 4
9 8 7
```

Similarly-short expressions could be used to transpose, rotate, flatten, and so on. With a bit more effort, much more involved transformations are also possible. For example, here we use a helper function to parse the input's indentation structure into a tree, and we use a few concatenations to shape this tree into a lisp-style expression.

```bash
> cat example.in
foo
  bar1
  bar2
    baz
  bar3
> hawk -ad 'postorder (\x -> printf "(%s)" . L.intercalate " " . (unpack x:))' example.in
(foo (bar1) (bar2 (baz)) (bar3))
```
([prelude.hs](postorder/prelude.hs))

Numerical operations are possible, but a bit inconvenient because Hawk exposes its input as a collection of ByteString values, which need to be [unpacked](http://hackage.haskell.org/packages/archive/bytestring/latest/doc/html/Data-ByteString-Lazy-Char8.html#v:unpack) and [read](http://hackage.haskell.org/packages/archive/base/latest/doc/html/Prelude.html#v:read) before being manipulated.

```bash
> seq 3 | hawk -ad 'sum . L.map (read . B.unpack)'
6
```

It is possible to populate `~/.hawk/prelude.hs` with some utility functions
for easy conversion from ByteString.

```bash
> seq 3 | hawk -ad 'sum . L.map toInt'
6
```
([prelude.hs](conversions/prelude.hs))

## Modes

Without any flag, Hawk simply evaluates the given Haskell expression.

```bash
> hawk '2 ^ 100'
1267650600228229401496703205376
```

In order to transform the input, it is necessary to use one of Hawk's two other modes, `--apply` and `--map`.

```bash
> printf "1 2 3\n4 5 6\n7 8 9\n" | hawk -a 'L.take 2'
1 2 3
4 5 6
```

With the first mode, we `--apply` the user expression to the entire input. With the second, the expression is applied to each line, using `map`.

```bash
> printf "1 2 3\n4 5 6\n7 8 9\n" | hawk -m 'L.take 2'
1 2
4 5
7 8
```

In a future version of Hawk, type inference will be used to infer the appropriate mode. See the `magic` branch for a prototype.


## Input Formats

By default, Hawk reads and writes text in a tabular format typical of the
command-line: each line is a row of whitespace-separated fields.

This table is represented as a list of list of strings, which is what
the user expression receives in the `--apply` mode. One easy way of
validating that your input is being parsed the way you expect is to
[show](http://hackage.haskell.org/packages/archive/base/latest/doc/html/Prelude.html#v:show) it:

```bash
> printf "1 2 3\n4 5 6\n7 8 9\n" | hawk -a 'show'
[["1","2","3"],["4","5","6"],["7","8","9"]]
```

One slightly-confusing detail is that those elements aren't `String`s, they're `ByteString`s.
This allows your transformations to run faster, at the cost of a bit of inconvenience
when you need to parse a numeric field.

```bash
> printf "1 2 3\n4 5 6\n7 8 9\n" | hawk -a 'id :: [[B.ByteString]] -> [[B.ByteString]]'
1 2 3
4 5 6
7 8 9
```

By default, fields are separated by a sequence of whitespace characters.
To change the `--field-delimiter`, use the `-d` flag to split on the character of your choice.

```bash
> printf "1\t2\t3\n4\t5\t6\n7\t8\t9\n" | hawk -a -d'\t' 'L.transpose'
1	4	7
2	5	8
3	6	9
```

```bash
> printf "1,2,3\n4,5,6\n7,8,9\n" | hawk -ad, L.transpose
1,4,7
2,5,8
3,6,9
```

It is also possible to change the `--record-delimiter` using `-D`. By default, records are separated by newlines. As you can see, delimiters can be longer than a single character.

```bash
> printf "x1*y1*z1 + x2*y2*z2" | hawk -D' + ' -d'*' -a 'L.transpose'
x1*x2 + y1*y2 + z1*z2
```

Of course, tables are not the only common command-line format. If you don't
need records to be separated into fields, simply use an empty `--field-delimiter`.

```bash
> seq 3 | hawk -d -a 'show :: [B.ByteString] -> String'
["1","2","3"]
```

Finally, to work directly on the ByteString, use an empty `--record-delimiter`.

```bash
> seq 3 | hawk -D -a 'show :: B.ByteString -> String'
"1\n2\n3\n"
```


## Output Formats

Hawk writes text in a tabular format typical of the command-line.

The type of the user function must be compatible with this tabular format.
Recall that, in Hawk, tabular means list of lists of ByteString where the first
list is the list of records, the second list is the list of fields for each record
and the ByteString is the content of a single cell.

For the cell content type, any type that is instance of
[Show](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.6.0.1/docs/Prelude.html#t:Show)
is valid.

For the list of fields, any type that is instance of
[Row](https://raw.github.com/gelisam/hawk/master/src/System/Console/Hawk/Representable.hs) can be used. All standard data types are instance of this class.

For the list of records, any type that is instance of
[Rows](https://raw.github.com/gelisam/hawk/master/src/System/Console/Hawk/Representable.hs) can be used. All standard data types are instance of this class.

Let's do some examples to better understand how this works.

```bash
> hawk '[[B.pack "1",B.pack "2"], [B.pack "3",B.pack "4"]]'
1 2
3 4
```

The given expression creates a list of lists of ByteString, that is exactly the
type that Hawk uses. The output is created using the default delimiter for fields,
that is space, and records, that is newline. Note that the whole expression is
what we called list of records, while the expressions `[B.pack "1",B.pack "2"]`
and `[B.pack "3",B.pack "4"]` are list of fields and `B.pack "1"`, `B.pack "2"`
, `B.pack "3"` and `B.pack "4"` are the cell values.

Changing the type of the cell values is still valid if the given type is instance
of `Show`. For examples, we can use String or Float instead of ByteString.

```bash
> hawk '[["1","2"], ["3","4"]]'
1 2
3 4
```

```bash
> hawk '[[1,2], [3,4]] :: [[Float]]'
1.0 2.0
3.0 4.0
```

In the examples above we used list as type for the list of fields and for the
list of records but what happens when we use other types? Each type has its own
representation but usually if the type is a container then it is represented
like a list (of fields or records) else it is represented as itself.

```bash
> hawk '1 :: Double'
1.0
```

```bash
> hawk '(True,False)'
True
False
```

```bash
> hawk '[(1,2),(3,4)] :: [(Int,Float)]'
1 2.0
3 4.0
```

The output delimiters for fields and records are by default the same delimiters
used for the input. They can be changed using `--output-field-delim` and
`--output-record-delim`.

```bash
> hawk -O' or ' '(True,False)'
True or False
```

```bash
> hawk -o'\t' '[(1,2),(3,4.0)] :: [(Int,Float)]'
1	2.0
3	4.0
```

Combining the input delimiters options with the output delimiters options can
be used to change the format of the given input.

```bash
> printf '1 2 3\n4 5 6\n' | hawk -m -d' ' -o'*' -D'\n' -O'+' 'id'
1*2*3+4*5*6
```

## User Prelude

The file `~/.hawk/prelude.hs` contains the Hawk context and can be used to
customize Hawk. If the directory `~/.hawk` doesn't
exist, Hawk creates it the first time is run with a default `prelude.hs` file

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE ExtendedDefaultRules, OverloadedStrings #-}
import Prelude
import qualified Data.ByteString.Lazy.Char8 as B
import qualified Data.List as L
```

Using this file it is possible to use all the functions of `Prelude` in Hawk.
It is also possible to use `ByteString` and `List` functions using the two
qualifiers:

```bash
> seq 3 | hawk -a 'L.length'
3
```

The `prelude.hs` file can be seen as a regular Haskell file with some limitations:

- only the `LANGUAGE` [pragma](http://www.haskell.org/ghc/docs/7.0.3/html/users_guide/pragmas.html) is supported
- [import modules](http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/Import) is restricted to
importing them totally: there is no way to import only a part of a module, so
something like `import Prelude (try)` won't import only try from the `Prelude`
module. The support is planned for future releases


## Contribute

Here is a quick tour of the codebase, as of [af2345](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/tree/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10).

First, [`parseArgs`](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/blob/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10/src/System/Console/Hawk/Args/Parse.hs#L194) converts the command-line arguments into a [`HawkSpec`](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/blob/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10/runtime/System/Console/Hawk/Args/Spec.hs#L8), a precise type describing the valid commands which can be passed to the `hawk` executable.

Then, [`processSpec`](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/blob/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10/src/System/Console/Hawk.hs#L44) executes this `HawkSpec`, most commonly by [caching the user prelude](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/blob/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10/src/System/Console/Hawk/Context/Base.hs#L36), and by asking the [hint](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hint) library to interpret the user expression.

At this point it is [the Hawk runtime](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/blob/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10/haskell-awk.cabal#L52) which takes over, using [`processTable`](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/blob/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10/runtime/System/Console/Hawk/Runtime/Base.hs#L26) to interpret standard input as a delimiter-separated table and to manipulate it via the user expression. Depending on the type of the user expression, [an appropriate output format](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/blob/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10/runtime/System/Console/Hawk/Representable.hs) is then chosen and sent to standard output.

Commit message:

Another rewording pass on "Input formats" section
"The best writing is rewriting."

doc/README.md, after:

# Hawk Documentation

```bash
> seq 3 | hawk -a 'L.reverse'
3
2
1
```

Hawk is a command-line tool for manipulating text. Like [awk](http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/cs/awkbook/index.html), it supports an unbounded number of text transformations, implemented by the user via an expression language. In the case of Hawk, the expression language is [Haskell](http://www.haskell.org/), whose basics are assumed to be familar to the reader.


## Overview: one-liners and beyond

Command-line tools such as awk are best for one-liners, while compiled languages such as Haskell are intended for larger projects, spanning several modules and thousands of lines of code. Hawk fills the gap between those two extremes.

```bash
> seq 10 | hawk -ad 'L.takeWhile (/="7") . L.dropWhile (/="3")'
3
4
5
6
```

Hawk lets you write Haskell one-liners on the command-line. When your one-liner grows too large to fit on a single line, move some of it to `~/.hawk/prelude.hs`, a Haskell module which hosts your custom helper functions.

```bash
> echo 'between x y = L.takeWhile (/=y) . L.dropWhile (/=x)' >> ~/.hawk/prelude.hs
> seq 10 | hawk -ad 'between "3" "7"'
3
4
5
6
```

The above example illustrates how to create a new helper function `between`, and how to use it from Hawk. Whenever we use such helper functions, we will link to an example prelude containing the required definitions, like this:

([prelude.hs](between/prelude.hs))

If your prelude becomes too crowded, it might be a sign that your task is too big for Hawk. Simply move your prelude file to the folder of your choice, as the first module of a new Haskell project.


## When should I use Hawk?

At the moment, Hawk is best at filtering and reorganizing collections of strings organized in a table or as a sequence of lines. Many standard command-line tools can be easily approximated using [very short Haskell expressions](http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/Simple_Unix_tools); for example, here is a simplified version of [`head`](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Head_%28Unix%29).

```bash
> seq 10 | hawk -a 'L.take 3'
1
2
3
```

The original `head`, of course, is shorter and has more options. Hawk is useful when there isn't already a standard unix tool for what you need. For example, there is a standard tool for flipping tables vertically, but there is no tool for flipping them horizontally:

```bash
> printf "1 2 3\n4 5 6\n7 8 9\n" | tac
7 8 9
4 5 6
1 2 3
> printf "1 2 3\n4 5 6\n7 8 9\n" | hawk -m 'L.reverse'
3 2 1
6 5 4
9 8 7
```

Similarly-short expressions could be used to transpose, rotate, flatten, and so on. With a bit more effort, much more involved transformations are also possible. For example, here we use a helper function to parse the input's indentation structure into a tree, and we use a few concatenations to shape this tree into a lisp-style expression.

```bash
> cat example.in
foo
  bar1
  bar2
    baz
  bar3
> hawk -ad 'postorder (\x -> printf "(%s)" . L.intercalate " " . (unpack x:))' example.in
(foo (bar1) (bar2 (baz)) (bar3))
```
([prelude.hs](postorder/prelude.hs))

Numerical operations are possible, but a bit inconvenient because Hawk exposes its input as a collection of ByteString values, which need to be [unpacked](http://hackage.haskell.org/packages/archive/bytestring/latest/doc/html/Data-ByteString-Lazy-Char8.html#v:unpack) and [read](http://hackage.haskell.org/packages/archive/base/latest/doc/html/Prelude.html#v:read) before being manipulated.

```bash
> seq 3 | hawk -ad 'sum . L.map (read . B.unpack)'
6
```

It is possible to populate `~/.hawk/prelude.hs` with some utility functions
for easy conversion from ByteString.

```bash
> seq 3 | hawk -ad 'sum . L.map toInt'
6
```
([prelude.hs](conversions/prelude.hs))

## Modes

Without any flag, Hawk simply evaluates the given Haskell expression.

```bash
> hawk '2 ^ 100'
1267650600228229401496703205376
```

In order to transform the input, it is necessary to use one of Hawk's two other modes, `--apply` and `--map`.

```bash
> printf "1 2 3\n4 5 6\n7 8 9\n" | hawk -a 'L.take 2'
1 2 3
4 5 6
```

With the first mode, we `--apply` the user expression to the entire input. With the second, the expression is applied to each line, using `map`.

```bash
> printf "1 2 3\n4 5 6\n7 8 9\n" | hawk -m 'L.take 2'
1 2
4 5
7 8
```

In a future version of Hawk, type inference will be used to infer the appropriate mode. See the `magic` branch for a prototype.


## Input Formats

By default, Hawk reads and writes text in a tabular format, as is typical on the
command-line. Each line is interpreted as a record containing whitespace-separated fields.

The user expression receives this table as a list of list of strings. If you want to make
sure that Hawk is parsing your input the way you expect, we recommend using
[show](http://hackage.haskell.org/packages/archive/base/latest/doc/html/Prelude.html#v:show)
to print the input in an unambiguous way:

```bash
> printf "1 2 3\n4 5 6\n7 8 9\n" | hawk -a 'show'
[["1","2","3"],["4","5","6"],["7","8","9"]]
```

One slightly-confusing detail is that this `"1"` is a `ByteString`, not a regular `String`.
This allows your text transformations to run faster, at the cost of a bit of inconvenience
when you need to parse a numeric field, as explained above.

To verify that you and Hawk agree on the type which your user expression can have, we
recommend using a type annotation, like you would in ghci. As you can see, the input type
is fixed, but the output type can vary.

```bash
> printf "1 2 3\n4 5 6\n7 8 9\n" | hawk -a 'id :: [[B.ByteString]] -> [[B.ByteString]]'
1 2 3
4 5 6
7 8 9
> printf "1 2 3\n4 5 6\n7 8 9\n" | hawk -a 'L.head :: [[B.ByteString]] -> [B.ByteString]'
1 2 3
```

By default, fields are separated by a sequence of whitespace characters.
To change the `--field-delimiter`, use the `-d` flag to split on the character of your choice.

```bash
> printf "1\t2\t3\n4\t5\t6\n7\t8\t9\n" | hawk -a -d'\t' 'L.transpose'
1	4	7
2	5	8
3	6	9
```

```bash
> printf "1,2,3\n4,5,6\n7,8,9\n" | hawk -ad, L.transpose
1,4,7
2,5,8
3,6,9
```

By default, records are separated by newlines.
To change the `--record-delimiter`, use the `-D` flag.
As you can see, delimiters can be longer than a single character.

```bash
> printf "x1*y1*z1 + x2*y2*z2" | hawk -D' + ' -d'*' -a 'L.transpose'
x1*x2 + y1*y2 + z1*z2
```

Of course, tables are not the only common command-line format. If you don't
need records to be separated into fields, you can use an empty `--field-delimiter` to disable fields.

```bash
> seq 3 | hawk -d -a 'show :: [B.ByteString] -> String'
["1","2","3"]
```

Finally, disabling records gives you direct access to the input `ByteString`. This allows you to manually parse the input from any format, including binary formats such as images.

```bash
> seq 3 | hawk -D -a 'show :: B.ByteString -> String'
"1\n2\n3\n"
```


## Output Formats

Hawk writes text in a tabular format typical of the command-line.

The type of the user function must be compatible with this tabular format.
Recall that, in Hawk, tabular means list of lists of ByteString where the first
list is the list of records, the second list is the list of fields for each record
and the ByteString is the content of a single cell.

For the cell content type, any type that is instance of
[Show](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.6.0.1/docs/Prelude.html#t:Show)
is valid.

For the list of fields, any type that is instance of
[Row](https://raw.github.com/gelisam/hawk/master/src/System/Console/Hawk/Representable.hs) can be used. All standard data types are instance of this class.

For the list of records, any type that is instance of
[Rows](https://raw.github.com/gelisam/hawk/master/src/System/Console/Hawk/Representable.hs) can be used. All standard data types are instance of this class.

Let's do some examples to better understand how this works.

```bash
> hawk '[[B.pack "1",B.pack "2"], [B.pack "3",B.pack "4"]]'
1 2
3 4
```

The given expression creates a list of lists of ByteString, that is exactly the
type that Hawk uses. The output is created using the default delimiter for fields,
that is space, and records, that is newline. Note that the whole expression is
what we called list of records, while the expressions `[B.pack "1",B.pack "2"]`
and `[B.pack "3",B.pack "4"]` are list of fields and `B.pack "1"`, `B.pack "2"`
, `B.pack "3"` and `B.pack "4"` are the cell values.

Changing the type of the cell values is still valid if the given type is instance
of `Show`. For examples, we can use String or Float instead of ByteString.

```bash
> hawk '[["1","2"], ["3","4"]]'
1 2
3 4
```

```bash
> hawk '[[1,2], [3,4]] :: [[Float]]'
1.0 2.0
3.0 4.0
```

In the examples above we used list as type for the list of fields and for the
list of records but what happens when we use other types? Each type has its own
representation but usually if the type is a container then it is represented
like a list (of fields or records) else it is represented as itself.

```bash
> hawk '1 :: Double'
1.0
```

```bash
> hawk '(True,False)'
True
False
```

```bash
> hawk '[(1,2),(3,4)] :: [(Int,Float)]'
1 2.0
3 4.0
```

The output delimiters for fields and records are by default the same delimiters
used for the input. They can be changed using `--output-field-delim` and
`--output-record-delim`.

```bash
> hawk -O' or ' '(True,False)'
True or False
```

```bash
> hawk -o'\t' '[(1,2),(3,4.0)] :: [(Int,Float)]'
1	2.0
3	4.0
```

Combining the input delimiters options with the output delimiters options can
be used to change the format of the given input.

```bash
> printf '1 2 3\n4 5 6\n' | hawk -m -d' ' -o'*' -D'\n' -O'+' 'id'
1*2*3+4*5*6
```

## User Prelude

The file `~/.hawk/prelude.hs` contains the Hawk context and can be used to
customize Hawk. If the directory `~/.hawk` doesn't
exist, Hawk creates it the first time is run with a default `prelude.hs` file

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE ExtendedDefaultRules, OverloadedStrings #-}
import Prelude
import qualified Data.ByteString.Lazy.Char8 as B
import qualified Data.List as L
```

Using this file it is possible to use all the functions of `Prelude` in Hawk.
It is also possible to use `ByteString` and `List` functions using the two
qualifiers:

```bash
> seq 3 | hawk -a 'L.length'
3
```

The `prelude.hs` file can be seen as a regular Haskell file with some limitations:

- only the `LANGUAGE` [pragma](http://www.haskell.org/ghc/docs/7.0.3/html/users_guide/pragmas.html) is supported
- [import modules](http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/Import) is restricted to
importing them totally: there is no way to import only a part of a module, so
something like `import Prelude (try)` won't import only try from the `Prelude`
module. The support is planned for future releases


## Contribute

Here is a quick tour of the codebase, as of [af2345](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/tree/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10).

First, [`parseArgs`](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/blob/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10/src/System/Console/Hawk/Args/Parse.hs#L194) converts the command-line arguments into a [`HawkSpec`](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/blob/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10/runtime/System/Console/Hawk/Args/Spec.hs#L8), a precise type describing the valid commands which can be passed to the `hawk` executable.

Then, [`processSpec`](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/blob/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10/src/System/Console/Hawk.hs#L44) executes this `HawkSpec`, most commonly by [caching the user prelude](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/blob/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10/src/System/Console/Hawk/Context/Base.hs#L36), and by asking the [hint](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hint) library to interpret the user expression.

At this point it is [the Hawk runtime](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/blob/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10/haskell-awk.cabal#L52) which takes over, using [`processTable`](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/blob/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10/runtime/System/Console/Hawk/Runtime/Base.hs#L26) to interpret standard input as a delimiter-separated table and to manipulate it via the user expression. Depending on the type of the user expression, [an appropriate output format](https://github.com/gelisam/hawk/blob/af2345972f570a86a219b09636d832213a488d10/runtime/System/Console/Hawk/Representable.hs) is then chosen and sent to standard output.
